docs/concepts/experimental.md, before:

# Experimental Features

In this section you will find documentation for new, experimental features in Pydantic. These features are subject to change or removal, and we are looking for feedback and suggestions before making them a permanent part of Pydantic.

## Importing Experimental Feature Warnings

When you import an experimental feature, you'll see a warning message that the feature is experimental. You can disable this warning with the following:

```python
import warnings

from pydantic import PydanticExperimentalWarning

warnings.filterwarnings('ignore', category=PydanticExperimentalWarning)
```

<!-- TODO: (@sydney-runkle) add link to versioning policy for experimental features -->

## Pipeline API

Pydantic v2.8.0 introduced an experimental "pipeline" API that allows composing of parsing (validation), constraints and transformations in a more type-safe manner than existing APIs. This API is subject to change or removal, we are looking for feedback and suggestions before making it a permanent part of Pydantic.

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.experimental.pipeline`][pydantic.experimental.pipeline]<br>

Generally, the pipeline API is used to define a sequence of steps to apply to incoming data during validation. The pipeline API is designed to be more type-safe and composable than the existing Pydantic API.

Each step in the pipeline can be:
* A validation step that runs pydantic validation on the provided type
* A transformation step that modifies the data
* A constraint step that checks the data against a condition
* A predicate step that checks the data against a condition and raises an error if it returns `False`

<!-- TODO: (@sydney-runkle) add more documentation once we solidify the API during the experimental phase -->

```python
from __future__ import annotations

from datetime import datetime

from typing_extensions import Annotated

from pydantic import BaseModel
from pydantic.experimental.pipeline import validate_as, validate_as_deferred


class User(BaseModel):
    name: Annotated[str, validate_as(str).str_lower()]  # (1)!
    age: Annotated[int, validate_as(int).gt(0)]  # (2)!
    username: Annotated[str, validate_as(str).str_pattern(r'[a-z]+')]  # (3)!
    password: Annotated[
        str,
        validate_as(str)
        .transform(str.lower)
        .predicate(lambda x: x != 'password'),  # (4)!
    ]
    favorite_number: Annotated[  # (5)!
        int,
        (validate_as(int) | validate_as(str).str_strip().validate_as(int)).gt(
            0
        ),
    ]
    friends: Annotated[list[User], validate_as(...).len(0, 100)]  # (6)!
    family: Annotated[  # (7)!
        list[User],
        validate_as_deferred(lambda: list[User]).transform(lambda x: x[1:]),
    ]
    bio: Annotated[
        datetime,
        validate_as(int)
        .transform(lambda x: x / 1_000_000)
        .validate_as(...),  # (8)!
    ]
```

1. Lowercase a string.
2. Constrain an integer to be greater than zero.
3. Constrain a string to match a regex pattern.
4. You can also use the lower level transform, constrain and predicate methods.
5. Use the `|` or `&` operators to combine steps (like a logical OR or AND).
6. Calling `validate_as(...)` with `Ellipsis`, `...` as the first positional argument implies `validate_as(<field type>)`. Use `validate_as(Any)` to accept any type.
7. For recursive types you can use `validate_as_deferred` to reference the type itself before it's defined.
8. You can call `validate_as()` before or after other steps to do pre or post processing.

### Mapping from `BeforeValidator`, `AfterValidator` and `WrapValidator`

The `validate_as` method is a more type-safe way to define `BeforeValidator`, `AfterValidator` and `WrapValidator`:

```python
from typing_extensions import Annotated

from pydantic.experimental.pipeline import transform, validate_as

# BeforeValidator
Annotated[int, validate_as(str).str_strip().validate_as(...)]  # (1)!
# AfterValidator
Annotated[int, transform(lambda x: x * 2)]  # (2)!
# WrapValidator
Annotated[
    int,
    validate_as(str)
    .str_strip()
    .validate_as(...)
    .transform(lambda x: x * 2),  # (3)!
]
```

1. Strip whitespace from a string before parsing it as an integer.
2. Multiply an integer by 2 after parsing it.
3. Strip whitespace from a string, validate it as an integer, then multiply it by 2.

Commit message:

update to version policy docs

docs/concepts/experimental.md, after:

# Experimental Features

In this section you will find documentation for new, experimental features in Pydantic. These features are subject to change or removal, and we are looking for feedback and suggestions before making them a permanent part of Pydantic.

See our [Version Policy](../version-policy.md#experimental-features) for more information on experimental features.

## Feedback

We welcome feedback on experimental features! Please open an issue on the [Pydantic GitHub repository](https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic/issues/new/choose) to share your thoughts, requests, or suggestions.

We also encourage you to read through existing feedback and add your thoughts to existing issues.

## Warnings on Import

When you import an experimental feature from the `experimental` module, you'll see a warning message that the feature is experimental. You can disable this warning with the following:

```python
import warnings

from pydantic import PydanticExperimentalWarning

warnings.filterwarnings('ignore', category=PydanticExperimentalWarning)
```

## Pipeline API

Pydantic v2.8.0 introduced an experimental "pipeline" API that allows composing of parsing (validation), constraints and transformations in a more type-safe manner than existing APIs. This API is subject to change or removal, we are looking for feedback and suggestions before making it a permanent part of Pydantic.

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.experimental.pipeline`][pydantic.experimental.pipeline]<br>

Generally, the pipeline API is used to define a sequence of steps to apply to incoming data during validation. The pipeline API is designed to be more type-safe and composable than the existing Pydantic API.

Each step in the pipeline can be:
* A validation step that runs pydantic validation on the provided type
* A transformation step that modifies the data
* A constraint step that checks the data against a condition
* A predicate step that checks the data against a condition and raises an error if it returns `False`

<!-- TODO: (@sydney-runkle) add more documentation once we solidify the API during the experimental phase -->

```python
from __future__ import annotations

from datetime import datetime

from typing_extensions import Annotated

from pydantic import BaseModel
from pydantic.experimental.pipeline import validate_as, validate_as_deferred


class User(BaseModel):
    name: Annotated[str, validate_as(str).str_lower()]  # (1)!
    age: Annotated[int, validate_as(int).gt(0)]  # (2)!
    username: Annotated[str, validate_as(str).str_pattern(r'[a-z]+')]  # (3)!
    password: Annotated[
        str,
        validate_as(str)
        .transform(str.lower)
        .predicate(lambda x: x != 'password'),  # (4)!
    ]
    favorite_number: Annotated[  # (5)!
        int,
        (validate_as(int) | validate_as(str).str_strip().validate_as(int)).gt(
            0
        ),
    ]
    friends: Annotated[list[User], validate_as(...).len(0, 100)]  # (6)!
    family: Annotated[  # (7)!
        list[User],
        validate_as_deferred(lambda: list[User]).transform(lambda x: x[1:]),
    ]
    bio: Annotated[
        datetime,
        validate_as(int)
        .transform(lambda x: x / 1_000_000)
        .validate_as(...),  # (8)!
    ]
```

1. Lowercase a string.
2. Constrain an integer to be greater than zero.
3. Constrain a string to match a regex pattern.
4. You can also use the lower level transform, constrain and predicate methods.
5. Use the `|` or `&` operators to combine steps (like a logical OR or AND).
6. Calling `validate_as(...)` with `Ellipsis`, `...` as the first positional argument implies `validate_as(<field type>)`. Use `validate_as(Any)` to accept any type.
7. For recursive types you can use `validate_as_deferred` to reference the type itself before it's defined.
8. You can call `validate_as()` before or after other steps to do pre or post processing.

### Mapping from `BeforeValidator`, `AfterValidator` and `WrapValidator`

The `validate_as` method is a more type-safe way to define `BeforeValidator`, `AfterValidator` and `WrapValidator`:

```python
from typing_extensions import Annotated

from pydantic.experimental.pipeline import transform, validate_as

# BeforeValidator
Annotated[int, validate_as(str).str_strip().validate_as(...)]  # (1)!
# AfterValidator
Annotated[int, transform(lambda x: x * 2)]  # (2)!
# WrapValidator
Annotated[
    int,
    validate_as(str)
    .str_strip()
    .validate_as(...)
    .transform(lambda x: x * 2),  # (3)!
]
```

1. Strip whitespace from a string before parsing it as an integer.
2. Multiply an integer by 2 after parsing it.
3. Strip whitespace from a string, validate it as an integer, then multiply it by 2.
