docs/concepts/json.md, before:

!!! warning "🚧 Work in Progress"
    This page is a work in progress.

# JSON

## Json Parsing

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_json`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_json]<br>
    [`pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter.validate_json`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter.validate_json]<br>
<!-- waiting for https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic-core/pull/1070 -->
<!--     [`pydantic_core.from_json`][pydantic_core.from_json]<br>) -->

Pydantic provides builtin JSON parsing, which helps achieve:

* Significant performance improvements without the cost of using a 3rd party library
* Support for custom errors
* Support for `strict` specifications

Here's an example of Pydantic's builtin JSON parsing via the [`model_validate_json`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_json] method, showcasing the support for `strict` specifications while parsing JSON data that doesn't match the model's type annotations:

```py
from datetime import date
from typing import Tuple

from pydantic import BaseModel, ConfigDict, ValidationError


class Event(BaseModel):
    model_config = ConfigDict(strict=True)

    when: date
    where: Tuple[int, int]


json_data = '{"when": "1987-01-28", "where": [51, -1]}'
print(Event.model_validate_json(json_data))  # (1)!
#> when=datetime.date(1987, 1, 28) where=(51, -1)

try:
    Event.model_validate({'when': '1987-01-28', 'where': [51, -1]})  # (2)!
except ValidationError as e:
    print(e)
    """
    2 validation errors for Event
    when
      Input should be a valid date [type=date_type, input_value='1987-01-28', input_type=str]
    where
      Input should be a valid tuple [type=tuple_type, input_value=[51, -1], input_type=list]
    """
```

1. JSON has no `date` or tuple types, but Pydantic knows that so allows strings and arrays as inputs respectively when parsing JSON directly.
2. If you pass the same values to the [`model_validate`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate] method, Pydantic will raise a validation error because the `strict` configuration is enabled.

In v2.5.0 and above, Pydantic uses [`jiter`](https://docs.rs/jiter/latest/jiter/), a fast and iterable JSON parser, to parse JSON data.
Using `jiter` compared to `serde` results in modest performance improvements that will get even better in the future.

The `jiter` JSON parser is almost entirely compatible with the `serde` JSON parser,
with one noticeable enhancement being that `jiter` supports deserialization of `inf` and `NaN` values.
In the future, `jiter` is intended to enable support validation errors to include the location
in the original JSON input which contained the invalid value.

## JSON Serialization

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_dump_json`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_dump_json]<br>
    [`pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter.dump_json`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter.dump_json]<br>
    [`pydantic_core.to_json`][pydantic_core.to_json]<br>

For more information on JSON serialization, see the [Serialization Concepts](./serialization.md#modelmodel_dump_json) page.

Commit message:

Update `from_json` docs (#8144)
Co-authored-by: Samuel Colvin <s@muelcolvin.com>

docs/concepts/json.md, after:

!!! warning "🚧 Work in Progress"
    This page is a work in progress.

# JSON

## Json Parsing

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_json`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_json]<br>
    [`pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter.validate_json`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter.validate_json]<br>
    [`pydantic_core.from_json`][pydantic_core.from_json]<br>

Pydantic provides builtin JSON parsing, which helps achieve:

* Significant performance improvements without the cost of using a 3rd party library
* Support for custom errors
* Support for `strict` specifications

Here's an example of Pydantic's builtin JSON parsing via the [`model_validate_json`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_json] method, showcasing the support for `strict` specifications while parsing JSON data that doesn't match the model's type annotations:

```py
from datetime import date
from typing import Tuple

from pydantic import BaseModel, ConfigDict, ValidationError


class Event(BaseModel):
    model_config = ConfigDict(strict=True)

    when: date
    where: Tuple[int, int]


json_data = '{"when": "1987-01-28", "where": [51, -1]}'
print(Event.model_validate_json(json_data))  # (1)!
#> when=datetime.date(1987, 1, 28) where=(51, -1)

try:
    Event.model_validate({'when': '1987-01-28', 'where': [51, -1]})  # (2)!
except ValidationError as e:
    print(e)
    """
    2 validation errors for Event
    when
      Input should be a valid date [type=date_type, input_value='1987-01-28', input_type=str]
    where
      Input should be a valid tuple [type=tuple_type, input_value=[51, -1], input_type=list]
    """
```

1. JSON has no `date` or tuple types, but Pydantic knows that so allows strings and arrays as inputs respectively when parsing JSON directly.
2. If you pass the same values to the [`model_validate`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate] method, Pydantic will raise a validation error because the `strict` configuration is enabled.

In v2.5.0 and above, Pydantic uses [`jiter`](https://docs.rs/jiter/latest/jiter/), a fast and iterable JSON parser, to parse JSON data.
Using `jiter` compared to `serde` results in modest performance improvements that will get even better in the future.

The `jiter` JSON parser is almost entirely compatible with the `serde` JSON parser,
with one noticeable enhancement being that `jiter` supports deserialization of `inf` and `NaN` values.
In the future, `jiter` is intended to enable support validation errors to include the location
in the original JSON input which contained the invalid value.

## JSON Serialization

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_dump_json`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_dump_json]<br>
    [`pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter.dump_json`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter.dump_json]<br>
    [`pydantic_core.to_json`][pydantic_core.to_json]<br>

For more information on JSON serialization, see the [Serialization Concepts](./serialization.md#modelmodel_dump_json) page.
