docs/concepts/type_adapter.md, before:

You may have types that are not `BaseModel`s that you want to validate data against.
Or you may want to validate a `List[SomeModel]`, or dump it to JSON.

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter]<br>

For use cases like this, Pydantic provides [`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter],
which can be used for type validation, serialization, and JSON schema generation without needing to create a
[`BaseModel`][pydantic.main.BaseModel].

A [`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter] instance exposes some of the functionality from
[`BaseModel`][pydantic.main.BaseModel] instance methods for types that do not have such methods
(such as dataclasses, primitive types, and more):

```py
from typing import List

from typing_extensions import TypedDict

from pydantic import TypeAdapter, ValidationError


class User(TypedDict):
    name: str
    id: int


user_list_adapter = TypeAdapter(List[User])
print(repr(user_list_adapter.validate_python([{'name': 'Fred', 'id': '3'}])))
#> [{'name': 'Fred', 'id': 3}]

try:
    user_list_adapter.validate_python(
        [{'name': 'Fred', 'id': 'wrong', 'other': 'no'}]
    )
except ValidationError as e:
    print(e)
    """
    1 validation error for list[typed-dict]
    0.id
      Input should be a valid integer, unable to parse string as an integer [type=int_parsing, input_value='wrong', input_type=str]
    """
```

!!! note
    Despite some overlap in use cases with [`RootModel`][pydantic.root_model.RootModel],
    [`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter] should not be used as a type annotation for
    specifying fields of a `BaseModel`, etc.

## Parsing data into a specified type

[`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter] can be used to apply the parsing logic to populate Pydantic models
in a more ad-hoc way. This function behaves similarly to
[`BaseModel.model_validate`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate],
but works with arbitrary Pydantic-compatible types.

This is especially useful when you want to parse results into a type that is not a direct subclass of
[`BaseModel`][pydantic.main.BaseModel]. For example:

```py
from typing import List

from pydantic import BaseModel, TypeAdapter


class Item(BaseModel):
    id: int
    name: str


# `item_data` could come from an API call, eg., via something like:
# item_data = requests.get('https://my-api.com/items').json()
item_data = [{'id': 1, 'name': 'My Item'}]

items = TypeAdapter(List[Item]).validate_python(item_data)
print(items)
#> [Item(id=1, name='My Item')]
```

[`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter] is capable of parsing data into any of the types Pydantic can
handle as fields of a [`BaseModel`][pydantic.main.BaseModel].

!!! info "Performance considerations"
    When creating an instance of `TypeAdapter`, the provided type must be analyzed and converted into a pydantic-core
    schema. This comes with some non-trivial overhead, so it is recommended to create a `TypeAdapter` for a given type
    just once and reuse it in loops or other performance-critical code.

Commit message:

Add Type Adapter Docs example codes & information about dump_json() (#9477)
Co-authored-by: Sydney Runkle <54324534+sydney-runkle@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/concepts/type_adapter.md, after:

You may have types that are not `BaseModel`s that you want to validate data against.
Or you may want to validate a `List[SomeModel]`, or dump it to JSON.

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter]<br>

For use cases like this, Pydantic provides [`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter],
which can be used for type validation, serialization, and JSON schema generation without needing to create a
[`BaseModel`][pydantic.main.BaseModel].

A [`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter] instance exposes some of the functionality from
[`BaseModel`][pydantic.main.BaseModel] instance methods for types that do not have such methods
(such as dataclasses, primitive types, and more):

```py
from typing import List

from typing_extensions import TypedDict

from pydantic import TypeAdapter, ValidationError


class User(TypedDict):
    name: str
    id: int


user_list_adapter = TypeAdapter(List[User])
user_list = user_list_adapter.validate_python([{'name': 'Fred', 'id': '3'}])
print(repr(user_list))
#> [{'name': 'Fred', 'id': 3}]

try:
    user_list_adapter.validate_python(
        [{'name': 'Fred', 'id': 'wrong', 'other': 'no'}]
    )
except ValidationError as e:
    print(e)
    """
    1 validation error for list[typed-dict]
    0.id
      Input should be a valid integer, unable to parse string as an integer [type=int_parsing, input_value='wrong', input_type=str]
    """

print(repr(user_list_adapter.dump_json(user_list)))
#> b'[{"name":"Fred","id":3}]'
```

!!! info "`dump_json` returns `bytes`"
    `TypeAdapter`'s `dump_json` methods returns a `bytes` object, unlike the corresponding method for `BaseModel`, `model_dump_json`, which returns a `str`.
    The reason for this discrepancy is that in V1, model dumping returned a str type, so this behavior is retained in V2 for backwards compatibility.
    For the `BaseModel` case, `bytes` are coerced to `str` types, but `bytes` are often the desired end type.
    Hence, for the new `TypeAdapter` class in V2, the return type is simply `bytes`, which can easily be coerced to a `str` type if desired.

!!! note
    Despite some overlap in use cases with [`RootModel`][pydantic.root_model.RootModel],
    [`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter] should not be used as a type annotation for
    specifying fields of a `BaseModel`, etc.

## Parsing data into a specified type

[`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter] can be used to apply the parsing logic to populate Pydantic models
in a more ad-hoc way. This function behaves similarly to
[`BaseModel.model_validate`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate],
but works with arbitrary Pydantic-compatible types.

This is especially useful when you want to parse results into a type that is not a direct subclass of
[`BaseModel`][pydantic.main.BaseModel]. For example:

```py
from typing import List

from pydantic import BaseModel, TypeAdapter


class Item(BaseModel):
    id: int
    name: str


# `item_data` could come from an API call, eg., via something like:
# item_data = requests.get('https://my-api.com/items').json()
item_data = [{'id': 1, 'name': 'My Item'}]

items = TypeAdapter(List[Item]).validate_python(item_data)
print(items)
#> [Item(id=1, name='My Item')]
```

[`TypeAdapter`][pydantic.type_adapter.TypeAdapter] is capable of parsing data into any of the types Pydantic can
handle as fields of a [`BaseModel`][pydantic.main.BaseModel].

!!! info "Performance considerations"
    When creating an instance of `TypeAdapter`, the provided type must be analyzed and converted into a pydantic-core
    schema. This comes with some non-trivial overhead, so it is recommended to create a `TypeAdapter` for a given type
    just once and reuse it in loops or other performance-critical code.
