docs/usage/dataclasses.md, before:

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass`][pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass]<br>

If you don't want to use Pydantic's `BaseModel` you can instead get the same data validation on standard
[dataclasses](https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html) (introduced in Python 3.7).

```py
from datetime import datetime

from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class User:
    id: int
    name: str = 'John Doe'
    signup_ts: datetime = None


user = User(id='42', signup_ts='2032-06-21T12:00')
print(user)
"""
User(id=42, name='John Doe', signup_ts=datetime.datetime(2032, 6, 21, 12, 0))
"""
```

!!! note
    Keep in mind that `pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass` is **not** a replacement for `pydantic.BaseModel`.
    `pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass` provides a similar functionality to `dataclasses.dataclass` with the addition of
    Pydantic validation.
    There are cases where subclassing `pydantic.BaseModel` is the better choice.

    For more information and discussion see
    [pydantic/pydantic#710](https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic/issues/710).

Some differences between Pydantic dataclasses and `BaseModel` include:

*  How [initialization hooks](#initialization-hooks) work
*  [JSON dumping](#json-dumping)

You can use all the standard Pydantic field types. Note, however, that arguments passed to constructor will be copied in
order to perform validation and, where necessary coercion.

To perform validation or generate a JSON schema on a Pydantic dataclass, you should now wrap the dataclass
with a [`TypeAdapter`](type_adapter.md) and make use of its methods.

Fields that require a `default_factory` can be specified by either a `pydantic.Field` or a `dataclasses.field`.

```py
import dataclasses
from typing import List, Optional

from pydantic import Field, TypeAdapter
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class User:
    id: int
    name: str = 'John Doe'
    friends: List[int] = dataclasses.field(default_factory=lambda: [0])
    age: Optional[int] = dataclasses.field(
        default=None,
        metadata=dict(title='The age of the user', description='do not lie!'),
    )
    height: Optional[int] = Field(None, title='The height in cm', ge=50, le=300)


user = User(id='42')
print(TypeAdapter(User).json_schema())
"""
{
    'properties': {
        'id': {'title': 'Id', 'type': 'integer'},
        'name': {'default': 'John Doe', 'title': 'Name', 'type': 'string'},
        'friends': {
            'items': {'type': 'integer'},
            'title': 'Friends',
            'type': 'array',
        },
        'age': {
            'anyOf': [{'type': 'integer'}, {'type': 'null'}],
            'default': None,
            'description': 'do not lie!',
            'title': 'The age of the user',
        },
        'height': {
            'anyOf': [
                {'maximum': 300, 'minimum': 50, 'type': 'integer'},
                {'type': 'null'},
            ],
            'default': None,
            'title': 'The height in cm',
        },
    },
    'required': ['id'],
    'title': 'User',
    'type': 'object',
}
"""
```

`pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass`'s arguments are the same as the standard decorator, except one extra
keyword argument `config` which has the same meaning as [model_config](model_config.md).

!!! warning
    After v1.2, [The Mypy plugin](../integrations/mypy.md) must be installed to type check _pydantic_ dataclasses.

For more information about combining validators with dataclasses, see
[dataclass validators](validators.md#dataclass-validators).

## Dataclass config

If you want to modify the `config` like you would with a `BaseModel`, you have two options:

* Apply config to the dataclass decorator as a dict
* Use `ConfigDict` as the config

```py
from pydantic import ConfigDict
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


# Option 1 - use directly a dict
# Note: `mypy` will still raise typo error
@dataclass(config=dict(validate_assignment=True))  # (1)!
class MyDataclass1:
    a: int


# Option 2 - use `ConfigDict`
# (same as before at runtime since it's a `TypedDict` but with intellisense)
@dataclass(config=ConfigDict(validate_assignment=True))
class MyDataclass2:
    a: int
```

1. You can read more about `validate_assignment` in [model_config](model_config.md#validate-assignment).

!!! note
    Pydantic dataclasses do not support [`extra='allow'`](model_config.md#extra-attributes), where extra fields passed
    to the initializer would be stored as extra attributes on the dataclass.

    `extra='ignore'` is still supported for the purpose of ignoring
    unexpected fields while parsing data; they just won't be stored on the instance.

## Nested dataclasses

Nested dataclasses are supported both in dataclasses and normal models.

```py
from pydantic import AnyUrl
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class NavbarButton:
    href: AnyUrl


@dataclass
class Navbar:
    button: NavbarButton


navbar = Navbar(button={'href': 'https://example.com'})
print(navbar)
#> Navbar(button=NavbarButton(href=Url('https://example.com/')))
```

When used as fields, dataclasses (Pydantic or vanilla) should use dicts as validation inputs.

## Generic dataclasses

Pydantic supports generic dataclasses, including those with type variables.

```py
from typing import Generic, TypeVar

from pydantic import TypeAdapter
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass

T = TypeVar('T')


@dataclass
class GenericDataclass(Generic[T]):
    x: T


validator = TypeAdapter(GenericDataclass)

assert validator.validate_python({'x': None}).x is None
assert validator.validate_python({'x': 1}).x == 1
assert validator.validate_python({'x': 'a'}).x == 'a'
```

Note that, if you use the dataclass as a field of a `BaseModel` or via FastAPI you don't need a `TypeAdapter`.

## Stdlib dataclasses and Pydantic dataclasses

### Inherit from stdlib dataclasses

Stdlib dataclasses (nested or not) can also be inherited and Pydantic will automatically validate
all the inherited fields.

```py
import dataclasses

import pydantic


@dataclasses.dataclass
class Z:
    z: int


@dataclasses.dataclass
class Y(Z):
    y: int = 0


@pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass
class X(Y):
    x: int = 0


foo = X(x=b'1', y='2', z='3')
print(foo)
#> X(z=3, y=2, x=1)

try:
    X(z='pika')
except pydantic.ValidationError as e:
    print(e)
    """
    1 validation error for X
    z
      Input should be a valid integer, unable to parse string as an integer [type=int_parsing, input_value='pika', input_type=str]
    """
```

### Use of stdlib dataclasses with `BaseModel`

Bear in mind that stdlib dataclasses (nested or not) are **automatically converted** into Pydantic
dataclasses when mixed with `BaseModel`! Furthermore the generated Pydantic dataclass will have
the **exact same configuration** (`order`, `frozen`, ...) as the original one.

```py
import dataclasses
from datetime import datetime
from typing import Optional

from pydantic import BaseModel, ValidationError


@dataclasses.dataclass(frozen=True)
class User:
    name: str


@dataclasses.dataclass
class File:
    filename: str
    last_modification_time: Optional[datetime] = None


class Foo(BaseModel):
    file: File
    user: Optional[User] = None


file = File(
    filename=['not', 'a', 'string'],
    last_modification_time='2020-01-01T00:00',
)  # nothing is validated as expected
print(file)
"""
File(filename=['not', 'a', 'string'], last_modification_time='2020-01-01T00:00')
"""

try:
    Foo(file=file)
except ValidationError as e:
    print(e)
    """
    1 validation error for Foo
    file.filename
      Input should be a valid string [type=string_type, input_value=['not', 'a', 'string'], input_type=list]
    """

foo = Foo(file=File(filename='myfile'), user=User(name='pika'))
try:
    foo.user.name = 'bulbi'
except dataclasses.FrozenInstanceError as e:
    print(e)
    #> cannot assign to field 'name'
```

### Use custom types

Since stdlib dataclasses are automatically converted to add validation, using
custom types may cause some unexpected behavior.
In this case you can simply add `arbitrary_types_allowed` in the config!

```py
import dataclasses

from pydantic import BaseModel, ConfigDict
from pydantic.errors import PydanticSchemaGenerationError


class ArbitraryType:
    def __init__(self, value):
        self.value = value

    def __repr__(self):
        return f'ArbitraryType(value={self.value!r})'


@dataclasses.dataclass
class DC:
    a: ArbitraryType
    b: str


# valid as it is a builtin dataclass without validation
my_dc = DC(a=ArbitraryType(value=3), b='qwe')

try:

    class Model(BaseModel):
        dc: DC
        other: str

    # invalid as it is now a pydantic dataclass
    Model(dc=my_dc, other='other')
except PydanticSchemaGenerationError as e:
    print(e.message)
    """
    Unable to generate pydantic-core schema for <class '__main__.ArbitraryType'>. Set `arbitrary_types_allowed=True` in the model_config to ignore this error or implement `__get_pydantic_core_schema__` on your type to fully support it.

    If you got this error by calling handler(<some type>) within `__get_pydantic_core_schema__` then you likely need to call `handler.generate_schema(<some type>)` since we do not call `__get_pydantic_core_schema__` on `<some type>` otherwise to avoid infinite recursion.
    """


class Model(BaseModel):
    model_config = ConfigDict(arbitrary_types_allowed=True)

    dc: DC
    other: str


m = Model(dc=my_dc, other='other')
print(repr(m))
#> Model(dc=DC(a=ArbitraryType(value=3), b='qwe'), other='other')
```

### Checking if a dataclass is a pydantic dataclass

Pydantic dataclasses are still considered dataclasses, so using `dataclasses.is_dataclass` will return `True`. To check if a type is specifically a pydantic dataclass you can use `pydantic.dataclasses.is_pydantic_dataclass`.

```py
import dataclasses

import pydantic


@dataclasses.dataclass
class StdLibDataclass:
    id: int


PydanticDataclass = pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass(StdLibDataclass)

print(dataclasses.is_dataclass(StdLibDataclass))
#> True
print(pydantic.dataclasses.is_pydantic_dataclass(StdLibDataclass))
#> False

print(dataclasses.is_dataclass(PydanticDataclass))
#> True
print(pydantic.dataclasses.is_pydantic_dataclass(PydanticDataclass))
#> True
```

## Initialization hooks

When you initialize a dataclass, it is possible to execute code *before* or *after* validation
with the help of the [`@model_validator`](validators.md#model-validators) decorator `mode` parameter.

```py
from typing import Any, Dict

from pydantic import model_validator
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class Birth:
    year: int
    month: int
    day: int


@dataclass
class User:
    birth: Birth

    @model_validator(mode='before')
    def pre_root(cls, values: Dict[str, Any]) -> Dict[str, Any]:
        print(f'First: {values}')
        """
        First: ArgsKwargs((), {'birth': {'year': 1995, 'month': 3, 'day': 2}})
        """
        return values

    @model_validator(mode='after')
    def post_root(self) -> 'User':
        print(f'Third: {self}')
        #> Third: User(birth=Birth(year=1995, month=3, day=2))
        return self

    def __post_init__(self):
        print(f'Second: {self.birth}')
        #> Second: Birth(year=1995, month=3, day=2)


user = User(**{'birth': {'year': 1995, 'month': 3, 'day': 2}})
```

The `__post_init__` in Pydantic dataclasses is called in the _middle_ of validators.
Here is the order:

* `model_validator(mode='before')`
* `field_validator(mode='before')`
* `field_validator(mode='after')`
* Inner validators. e.g. validation for types like `int`, `str`, ...
* `__post_init__`.
* `model_validator(mode='after')`


```py requires="3.8"
from dataclasses import InitVar
from pathlib import Path
from typing import Optional

from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class PathData:
    path: Path
    base_path: InitVar[Optional[Path]]

    def __post_init__(self, base_path):
        print(f'Received path={self.path!r}, base_path={base_path!r}')
        #> Received path=PosixPath('world'), base_path=PosixPath('/hello')
        if base_path is not None:
            self.path = base_path / self.path


path_data = PathData('world', base_path='/hello')
# Received path='world', base_path='/hello'
assert path_data.path == Path('/hello/world')
```

### Difference with stdlib dataclasses

Note that the `dataclasses.dataclass` from Python stdlib implements only the `__post_init__` method since it doesn't run a validation step.

## JSON dumping

Pydantic dataclasses do not feature a `.model_dump_json()` function. To dump them as JSON, you will need to
make use of the [RootModel](models.md#rootmodel-and-custom-root-types) as follows:

```py output="json"
import dataclasses
from typing import List

from pydantic import RootModel
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class User:
    id: int
    name: str = 'John Doe'
    friends: List[int] = dataclasses.field(default_factory=lambda: [0])


user = User(id='42')
print(RootModel[User](User(id='42')).model_dump_json(indent=4))
"""
{
    "id": 42,
    "name": "John Doe",
    "friends": [
        0
    ]
}
"""
```

Commit message:

Update docs callout to indicate support for `extra` configuration on Pydantic dataclasses

docs/usage/dataclasses.md, after:

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass`][pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass]<br>

If you don't want to use Pydantic's `BaseModel` you can instead get the same data validation on standard
[dataclasses](https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html) (introduced in Python 3.7).

```py
from datetime import datetime

from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class User:
    id: int
    name: str = 'John Doe'
    signup_ts: datetime = None


user = User(id='42', signup_ts='2032-06-21T12:00')
print(user)
"""
User(id=42, name='John Doe', signup_ts=datetime.datetime(2032, 6, 21, 12, 0))
"""
```

!!! note
    Keep in mind that `pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass` is **not** a replacement for `pydantic.BaseModel`.
    `pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass` provides a similar functionality to `dataclasses.dataclass` with the addition of
    Pydantic validation.
    There are cases where subclassing `pydantic.BaseModel` is the better choice.

    For more information and discussion see
    [pydantic/pydantic#710](https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic/issues/710).

Some differences between Pydantic dataclasses and `BaseModel` include:

*  How [initialization hooks](#initialization-hooks) work
*  [JSON dumping](#json-dumping)

You can use all the standard Pydantic field types. Note, however, that arguments passed to constructor will be copied in
order to perform validation and, where necessary coercion.

To perform validation or generate a JSON schema on a Pydantic dataclass, you should now wrap the dataclass
with a [`TypeAdapter`](type_adapter.md) and make use of its methods.

Fields that require a `default_factory` can be specified by either a `pydantic.Field` or a `dataclasses.field`.

```py
import dataclasses
from typing import List, Optional

from pydantic import Field, TypeAdapter
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class User:
    id: int
    name: str = 'John Doe'
    friends: List[int] = dataclasses.field(default_factory=lambda: [0])
    age: Optional[int] = dataclasses.field(
        default=None,
        metadata=dict(title='The age of the user', description='do not lie!'),
    )
    height: Optional[int] = Field(None, title='The height in cm', ge=50, le=300)


user = User(id='42')
print(TypeAdapter(User).json_schema())
"""
{
    'properties': {
        'id': {'title': 'Id', 'type': 'integer'},
        'name': {'default': 'John Doe', 'title': 'Name', 'type': 'string'},
        'friends': {
            'items': {'type': 'integer'},
            'title': 'Friends',
            'type': 'array',
        },
        'age': {
            'anyOf': [{'type': 'integer'}, {'type': 'null'}],
            'default': None,
            'description': 'do not lie!',
            'title': 'The age of the user',
        },
        'height': {
            'anyOf': [
                {'maximum': 300, 'minimum': 50, 'type': 'integer'},
                {'type': 'null'},
            ],
            'default': None,
            'title': 'The height in cm',
        },
    },
    'required': ['id'],
    'title': 'User',
    'type': 'object',
}
"""
```

`pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass`'s arguments are the same as the standard decorator, except one extra
keyword argument `config` which has the same meaning as [model_config](model_config.md).

!!! warning
    After v1.2, [The Mypy plugin](../integrations/mypy.md) must be installed to type check _pydantic_ dataclasses.

For more information about combining validators with dataclasses, see
[dataclass validators](validators.md#dataclass-validators).

## Dataclass config

If you want to modify the `config` like you would with a `BaseModel`, you have two options:

* Apply config to the dataclass decorator as a dict
* Use `ConfigDict` as the config

```py
from pydantic import ConfigDict
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


# Option 1 - use directly a dict
# Note: `mypy` will still raise typo error
@dataclass(config=dict(validate_assignment=True))  # (1)!
class MyDataclass1:
    a: int


# Option 2 - use `ConfigDict`
# (same as before at runtime since it's a `TypedDict` but with intellisense)
@dataclass(config=ConfigDict(validate_assignment=True))
class MyDataclass2:
    a: int
```

1. You can read more about `validate_assignment` in [model_config](model_config.md#validate-assignment).

!!! note
    Pydantic dataclasses support [`extra`](model_config.md#extra-attributes) configuration to `ignore`, `forbid`, or
    `allow` extra fields passed to the initializer. However, some default behavior of stdlib dataclasses may prevail.
    For example, extra fields are omitted when `print`ing a Pydantic dataclass with allowed extra fields.

## Nested dataclasses

Nested dataclasses are supported both in dataclasses and normal models.

```py
from pydantic import AnyUrl
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class NavbarButton:
    href: AnyUrl


@dataclass
class Navbar:
    button: NavbarButton


navbar = Navbar(button={'href': 'https://example.com'})
print(navbar)
#> Navbar(button=NavbarButton(href=Url('https://example.com/')))
```

When used as fields, dataclasses (Pydantic or vanilla) should use dicts as validation inputs.

## Generic dataclasses

Pydantic supports generic dataclasses, including those with type variables.

```py
from typing import Generic, TypeVar

from pydantic import TypeAdapter
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass

T = TypeVar('T')


@dataclass
class GenericDataclass(Generic[T]):
    x: T


validator = TypeAdapter(GenericDataclass)

assert validator.validate_python({'x': None}).x is None
assert validator.validate_python({'x': 1}).x == 1
assert validator.validate_python({'x': 'a'}).x == 'a'
```

Note that, if you use the dataclass as a field of a `BaseModel` or via FastAPI you don't need a `TypeAdapter`.

## Stdlib dataclasses and Pydantic dataclasses

### Inherit from stdlib dataclasses

Stdlib dataclasses (nested or not) can also be inherited and Pydantic will automatically validate
all the inherited fields.

```py
import dataclasses

import pydantic


@dataclasses.dataclass
class Z:
    z: int


@dataclasses.dataclass
class Y(Z):
    y: int = 0


@pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass
class X(Y):
    x: int = 0


foo = X(x=b'1', y='2', z='3')
print(foo)
#> X(z=3, y=2, x=1)

try:
    X(z='pika')
except pydantic.ValidationError as e:
    print(e)
    """
    1 validation error for X
    z
      Input should be a valid integer, unable to parse string as an integer [type=int_parsing, input_value='pika', input_type=str]
    """
```

### Use of stdlib dataclasses with `BaseModel`

Bear in mind that stdlib dataclasses (nested or not) are **automatically converted** into Pydantic
dataclasses when mixed with `BaseModel`! Furthermore the generated Pydantic dataclass will have
the **exact same configuration** (`order`, `frozen`, ...) as the original one.

```py
import dataclasses
from datetime import datetime
from typing import Optional

from pydantic import BaseModel, ValidationError


@dataclasses.dataclass(frozen=True)
class User:
    name: str


@dataclasses.dataclass
class File:
    filename: str
    last_modification_time: Optional[datetime] = None


class Foo(BaseModel):
    file: File
    user: Optional[User] = None


file = File(
    filename=['not', 'a', 'string'],
    last_modification_time='2020-01-01T00:00',
)  # nothing is validated as expected
print(file)
"""
File(filename=['not', 'a', 'string'], last_modification_time='2020-01-01T00:00')
"""

try:
    Foo(file=file)
except ValidationError as e:
    print(e)
    """
    1 validation error for Foo
    file.filename
      Input should be a valid string [type=string_type, input_value=['not', 'a', 'string'], input_type=list]
    """

foo = Foo(file=File(filename='myfile'), user=User(name='pika'))
try:
    foo.user.name = 'bulbi'
except dataclasses.FrozenInstanceError as e:
    print(e)
    #> cannot assign to field 'name'
```

### Use custom types

Since stdlib dataclasses are automatically converted to add validation, using
custom types may cause some unexpected behavior.
In this case you can simply add `arbitrary_types_allowed` in the config!

```py
import dataclasses

from pydantic import BaseModel, ConfigDict
from pydantic.errors import PydanticSchemaGenerationError


class ArbitraryType:
    def __init__(self, value):
        self.value = value

    def __repr__(self):
        return f'ArbitraryType(value={self.value!r})'


@dataclasses.dataclass
class DC:
    a: ArbitraryType
    b: str


# valid as it is a builtin dataclass without validation
my_dc = DC(a=ArbitraryType(value=3), b='qwe')

try:

    class Model(BaseModel):
        dc: DC
        other: str

    # invalid as it is now a pydantic dataclass
    Model(dc=my_dc, other='other')
except PydanticSchemaGenerationError as e:
    print(e.message)
    """
    Unable to generate pydantic-core schema for <class '__main__.ArbitraryType'>. Set `arbitrary_types_allowed=True` in the model_config to ignore this error or implement `__get_pydantic_core_schema__` on your type to fully support it.

    If you got this error by calling handler(<some type>) within `__get_pydantic_core_schema__` then you likely need to call `handler.generate_schema(<some type>)` since we do not call `__get_pydantic_core_schema__` on `<some type>` otherwise to avoid infinite recursion.
    """


class Model(BaseModel):
    model_config = ConfigDict(arbitrary_types_allowed=True)

    dc: DC
    other: str


m = Model(dc=my_dc, other='other')
print(repr(m))
#> Model(dc=DC(a=ArbitraryType(value=3), b='qwe'), other='other')
```

### Checking if a dataclass is a pydantic dataclass

Pydantic dataclasses are still considered dataclasses, so using `dataclasses.is_dataclass` will return `True`. To check if a type is specifically a pydantic dataclass you can use `pydantic.dataclasses.is_pydantic_dataclass`.

```py
import dataclasses

import pydantic


@dataclasses.dataclass
class StdLibDataclass:
    id: int


PydanticDataclass = pydantic.dataclasses.dataclass(StdLibDataclass)

print(dataclasses.is_dataclass(StdLibDataclass))
#> True
print(pydantic.dataclasses.is_pydantic_dataclass(StdLibDataclass))
#> False

print(dataclasses.is_dataclass(PydanticDataclass))
#> True
print(pydantic.dataclasses.is_pydantic_dataclass(PydanticDataclass))
#> True
```

## Initialization hooks

When you initialize a dataclass, it is possible to execute code *before* or *after* validation
with the help of the [`@model_validator`](validators.md#model-validators) decorator `mode` parameter.

```py
from typing import Any, Dict

from pydantic import model_validator
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class Birth:
    year: int
    month: int
    day: int


@dataclass
class User:
    birth: Birth

    @model_validator(mode='before')
    def pre_root(cls, values: Dict[str, Any]) -> Dict[str, Any]:
        print(f'First: {values}')
        """
        First: ArgsKwargs((), {'birth': {'year': 1995, 'month': 3, 'day': 2}})
        """
        return values

    @model_validator(mode='after')
    def post_root(self) -> 'User':
        print(f'Third: {self}')
        #> Third: User(birth=Birth(year=1995, month=3, day=2))
        return self

    def __post_init__(self):
        print(f'Second: {self.birth}')
        #> Second: Birth(year=1995, month=3, day=2)


user = User(**{'birth': {'year': 1995, 'month': 3, 'day': 2}})
```

The `__post_init__` in Pydantic dataclasses is called in the _middle_ of validators.
Here is the order:

* `model_validator(mode='before')`
* `field_validator(mode='before')`
* `field_validator(mode='after')`
* Inner validators. e.g. validation for types like `int`, `str`, ...
* `__post_init__`.
* `model_validator(mode='after')`


```py requires="3.8"
from dataclasses import InitVar
from pathlib import Path
from typing import Optional

from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class PathData:
    path: Path
    base_path: InitVar[Optional[Path]]

    def __post_init__(self, base_path):
        print(f'Received path={self.path!r}, base_path={base_path!r}')
        #> Received path=PosixPath('world'), base_path=PosixPath('/hello')
        if base_path is not None:
            self.path = base_path / self.path


path_data = PathData('world', base_path='/hello')
# Received path='world', base_path='/hello'
assert path_data.path == Path('/hello/world')
```

### Difference with stdlib dataclasses

Note that the `dataclasses.dataclass` from Python stdlib implements only the `__post_init__` method since it doesn't run a validation step.

## JSON dumping

Pydantic dataclasses do not feature a `.model_dump_json()` function. To dump them as JSON, you will need to
make use of the [RootModel](models.md#rootmodel-and-custom-root-types) as follows:

```py output="json"
import dataclasses
from typing import List

from pydantic import RootModel
from pydantic.dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass
class User:
    id: int
    name: str = 'John Doe'
    friends: List[int] = dataclasses.field(default_factory=lambda: [0])


user = User(id='42')
print(RootModel[User](User(id='42')).model_dump_json(indent=4))
"""
{
    "id": 42,
    "name": "John Doe",
    "friends": [
        0
    ]
}
"""
```
